Add page "How to modernize a setup.py project?" (#1371)
pypa/packaging.python.org: source/guides/modernize-setup-py-project.rst

.. _modernize-setup-py-project:

==============================================
How to modernize a ``setup.py`` based project?
==============================================

> Must there be a ``pyproject.toml`` file?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Should a ``pyproject.toml`` file be used?
```

========================================

> Yes. This is strongly recommended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A ``pyproject.toml`` file is strongly recommended though not strictly required.
```

> The presence of a :file:`pyproject.toml` file itself does not bring much.

Reviewer: declaring-project-metadata
```suggestion
The :file:`pyproject.toml` file declares project metadata in a structured way.
```

> What is necessary is the ``[build-system]`` table first,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modernize the ``[build-system]`` table first,
```

> What is necessary is the ``[build-system]`` table first,
> and then the ``[project]`` table.

Reviewer 2: How about?

```suggestion
What is necessary is the ``[build-system]`` table first.
You can also (optionally) add a ``[project]`` table with static metadata. 
```

Author: I decided to remove the sentence with `[project]` after all. I felt it was distracting at this point in the document. We talk about `[project]` later on.

> Must ``setup.py`` be deleted?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Should ``setup.py`` be deleted?
```

=============================

> No. There is no such requirement for a modern :ref:`setuptools` based project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No, ``setup.py`` can exist in a modern :ref:`setuptools` based project.
```

The :term:`setup.py` is a valid configuration file for setuptools
that happens to be written in Python.

> However the following deprecated commands **MUST NOT** be run anymore,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following deprecated commands **MUST NOT** be run anymore,
```

Author: I feel like we need to keep the "However" here, as a counter point to the "No" that we have at the beginning of this section.

and their recommended replacement commands can be used instead:

+---------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| Deprecated                      | Current recommendation                 |
+=================================+========================================+
| ``python setup.py install``     | ``python -m pip install .``            |
+---------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| ``python setup.py develop``     | ``python -m pip install --editable .`` |
+---------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| ``python setup.py sdist``       | ``python -m build``                    |
+---------------------------------+                                        |
| ``python setup.py bdist_wheel`` |                                        |
+---------------------------------+----------------------------------------+

For more details:

* :ref:`setup-py-deprecated`

Where to start?
===============

> The :term:`project` must contain a :file:`pyproject.toml` file at the root of its source tree

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a :file:`pyproject.toml` file at the root of its source tree
```

Author: Maybe it was a bad stylistic choice, but the whole document is not written in this style of "do this, do that", but rather in the style "this should be here, this should contain this".

Mostly because the document was initially meant to belong in the "discussions" part, but now it is in the "guides" part.

I hope someone can rewrite later with better style, but all at once so it is not inconsistent.

Reviewer: Works for me. Thanks @sinoroc

so that the build frontend knows to install them
when building the :term:`distributions <Distribution Package>`.

For example a :file:`setup.py` file such as this:

.. code:: python

    import setuptools
    import some_build_toolkit  # comes from the `some-build-toolkit` library

    def get_version():
        version = some_build_toolkit.compute_version()
        return version

    setuptools.setup(
        name="my-project",
        version=get_version(),
    )

requires a :file:`pyproject.toml` file like this:

.. code:: toml

    [build-system]
    requires = [
        "setuptools",
        "some-build-toolkit",
    ]
    build-backend = "setuptools.build_meta"

For more details:

* :ref:`declaring-build-dependencies`

What is the build isolation feature?
====================================

Build frontends typically create an ephemeral virtual environment
where they install only the build dependencies (and their dependencies)
that are listed under ``build-sytem.requires``
and trigger the build in that environment.

For some projects this isolation is unwanted and it can be deactivated as follows:

> * ``python -m build --no-isolation``
> * ``python -m install --no-build-isolation``

Reviewer 3: I guess we should now stick to this.

```suggestion
* ``python3 -m build --no-isolation``
* ``python3 -m install --no-build-isolation``
```

Reviewer 4: Hmm. Windows users have no `python3` but only `python` (and the launcher to select the version). So I would not change this.

How to handle packaging metadata?
=================================

> All static metadata can be moved to a ``[project]`` table in the :file:`pyproject.toml` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All static metadata can (optionally) be moved to a ``[project]`` table in the :file:`pyproject.toml` file.
```

I think it is good to make emphasize that people do not have to do that, so we don't contribute to "migration anxiety" on the users... (There is already a lot on anxiety about the topic, which kind of inflates all the discussions on the topic).

    version = "1.2.3"

Read :ref:`declaring-project-metadata` for the full specification
of the content allowed in the ``[project]`` table.

How to handle dynamic metadata?
===============================

If some packaging metadata fields are not static
they need to be listed as ``dynamic`` in this ``[project]`` table.

For example a :file:`setup.py` file such as this:

.. code:: python

    import setuptools
    import some_build_toolkit

    def get_version():
        version = some_build_toolkit.compute_version()
        return version

    setuptools.setup(
        name="my-project",
        version=get_version(),
    )

can be modernized as follows:

.. code:: toml

    [build-system]
    requires = [
        "setuptools",
        "some-build-toolkit",
    ]
    build-backend = "setuptools.build_meta"

    [project]
    name = "my-project"
    dynamic = ["version"]

.. code:: python

    import setuptools
    import some_build_toolkit

    def get_version():
        version = some_build_toolkit.compute_version()
        return version

    setuptools.setup(
        version=get_version(),
    )

For more details:

* :ref:`declaring-project-metadata-dynamic`

> What if something that can not be changed expects a ``setup.py`` file?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What if some necessary functionality expects a ``setup.py`` file?
```

======================================================================

> Maybe there is a process somewhere that can not be changed and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a process exists that can not be changed easily, and it
```

> that wants to run a command such as ``python setup.py --name``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
needs to execute a command such as ``python setup.py --name``.
```

.. _modernize-setup-py-project:

==============================================
How to modernize a ``setup.py`` based project?
==============================================

Should ``pyproject.toml`` be added?
===================================

A :term:`pyproject.toml` file is strongly recommended.

> The presence of a :file:`pyproject.toml` file itself does not bring much. [#]_

Reviewer 5: I realized that this prompts an inaccuracy in my understanding of the matter. See https://github.com/pypa/sampleproject/pull/204#discussion_r1477124214.

@sinoroc I think this deserves a clarification. WDYT?

Author: @webknjaz As I stated in the other discussion thread you linked, I do not understand the issue.

The important thing is the content of `pyproject.toml`, first of all the `build-system` table.

I have been told, and I have written it in this document, that simply having an empty `pyproject.toml` triggers the "build isolation" behavior for pip (and other installers?). But that should be anecdotal nowadays (I heard it caused some issues at some point in the early days of PEP 517), isn't build isolation the default behavior for pip nowadays?

I am not sure how to improve this paragraph. Maybe we could move the whole sentence further down below or maybe even to a side note / foot note.

so that the build frontend knows to install them
when building the :term:`distributions <Distribution Package>`.

For example, a :file:`setup.py` file such as this:

.. code:: python

    import setuptools
    import some_build_toolkit  # comes from the `some-build-toolkit` library

    def get_version():
        version = some_build_toolkit.compute_version()
        return version

    setuptools.setup(
        name="my-project",
        version=get_version(),
    )

requires a :file:`pyproject.toml` file like this (:file:`setup.py` stays unchanged):

.. code:: toml

    [build-system]
    requires = [
        "setuptools",
        "some-build-toolkit",
    ]
    build-backend = "setuptools.build_meta"

For more details:

* :ref:`declaring-build-dependencies`

What is the build isolation feature?
====================================

Build frontends typically create an ephemeral virtual environment
where they install only the build dependencies (and their dependencies)
that are listed under ``build-sytem.requires``
and trigger the build in that environment.

For some projects this isolation is unwanted and it can be deactivated as follows:

* ``python -m build --no-isolation``

> * ``python -m install --no-build-isolation``

Reviewer 6: @sinoroc  What is `python -m install` ? Should this have been `python -m pip install` ?

Reviewer 5: It should've indeed. This is one of my most common typos.

Author: Oh... indeed, that is incomplete. I do not remember exactly, I think I recall it was a suggestion from someone else, but I can not find it anymore. But yes, it seems like it was supposed to be *pip*. Feel free to submit a pull request.

Author: @wimglenn @webknjaz Thanks for fixing this
